Britney Mueller is one of my favorite AI
experts in the world. She has a very
realistic and scientific understanding
of the space and and she presents it so
well. I think this in fact is the most
important AI post I have read yet this
year. And the reason is because it
dispels a notion too many people have a
problem with. Why is this so critical?
It's because we have all seen so many
people say, "Hey, I asked ChachiBT or
Claude or Perplexity or Gemini or
Google's AI mode why it gave me a
particular answer and the reasoning that
it gave me back told me more things
about how it works. And so now I
understand the sources that it uses and
all this kind of stuff." But it's not
true. This is false. You get this weird
answer. You think to yourself, why did
you say that? LLMs are not a SQL
database that contain a set of
information that you can query against.
They're not logging anything internal
about like how their systems work.
They're not they're not truth engines.
They are statistical lotteryies and
predictors of next tokens or next words.
Probability machines, exactly what what
Britney calls them here. It works like
this, right? Essentially, when you say,
"What's the capital of France?" the LLM
breaks it down into into numbers into
tokens, right? And then it and then it
says, hey, the most likely token based
on our model of all the rest of the
words around capital of France is Paris.
And so that's the answer that we're
going to return almost all of the time.
And with some scrubbing and some uh uh
you know, basically editorial input into
the model, they're able to return that
100% of the time. And and that's why you
get these replies that seem probably
right, especially on obvious stuff
almost all the time. The sky is in the
LLM's right word model returns blue
because blue is the the thing that most
of the time should be in there. But
sometimes it might say clear or it might
say somewhat cloudy because that appears
in there. If you ask about this guy in
Seattle, for example, we at Spartro,
Amanda and I like to call LLM spicy
autocomplete because because that's kind
of what they are and I can prove it to
you. So last month we asked uh people to
volunteer, put their information into
the survey and help us basically take
exactly the same question and ask LLMs
over and over and over again like like a
hundred times per and we had a more than
uh 600 people filled out the form. We
broke them into groups of 200 each and
then we asked, you know, enough so that
we got a hundred uh responses for
exactly the same input, right? So, they
all put in the same prompt. I'll give
you an example. Uh we asked them to
input the prompt, what are the best
chef's knives under $300 for a home
cook? And my answers, the WOFF classic 8
in and the Maiden 8 inch chef's knife,
those were not the answers other people
got. In fact, almost no two people got
the same list of brands, which of course
has implications for whether you should
track your brand in there. But when we
when we broke this down, um, what we
looked at is, you know, the brand, the
number of mentions in total, the times
it was, uh, ranked number one, rank
number two, rank number three, and other
ranks. And you can see like it's all
over the place. It's almost as though
chat GPT is just a spicy autocomplete.
It's running a statistical lottery of
the next token it should show.
And then when you ask it, how did you
determine that these were the best
knives, it gives an answer that is a
lie. It's not because it's intending to
lie. It's because it doesn't know the
truth. It doesn't know anything. The
only thing it can do when you ask it,
how did you determine these is give you
the same thing it gave you in the
initial response. Right? the statistical
lottery of probable next words, next
tokens that you know, but why when a
hundred other people ask chat GPT the
same thing uh did it show a bunch of
different brands and then it it goes off
about how best is a subjective word
which which of course is a non-answer in
itself but but that's because the model
like you know just didn't have a
predictive thing to say oh well that's
because chat GBT works this way because
it doesn't tell you how it works it
doesn't even know how it works. It only
knows next tokens. This is the only
answer. That's the truth. The most
likely token is the thing that's going
to appear. And yes, granted, people are
going to jump into the replies and
they're going to say, "Oh, retrieval
augmented generation means that it's not
just most likely tokens from the
original model, but also ones that are
coming from I I grant you that it it's
also crawling the web. It's also doing
Google searches and that kind of thing
and then returning results from that and
using the text from those. Sure, but
it's still fundamentally a probability
spicy autocomplete machine. And that's
why this is the most important AI post
of the year. Because if you don't
understand this and you don't understand
how AI works, you are going to really
fall apart when you start applying it to
your professional career or your life
decisions.